private endpoint: refine doc according to feedback (#10276)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections.md

If you have multiple clusters, you need to repeat these steps for each cluster that you want to connect to using AWS PrivateLink.

### Prerequisites

TiDB Cloud supports private endpoints only for Dedicated Tier clusters. You are expected to create a Dedicated Tier cluster before creating a private endpoint. For detailed instructions, see [Create a TiDB Cluster in TiDB Cloud](/tidb-cloud/create-tidb-cluster.md).

To start setting up a private endpoint, open the private endpoint creation page:

1. Click the **Project Settings** tab in the TiDB Cloud console.
2. Click **Private Endpoint** on the left menu.
3. Click **Add** on the **Private Endpoint** page.

### Step 1. Choose a TiDB cluster

1. Click the drop-down list and choose an available TiDB cluster.
2. Click **Next**.

### Step 2. Check the service endpoint region

Your service endpoint region is selected by default. Have a quick check and click **Next**.

> **Note:**
>
> The default region is where your cluster is located. Do not change it. Cross-region private endpoint is currently not supported.

### Step 3. Create an AWS interface endpoint

TiDB Cloud begins creating an endpoint service, which takes 3 to 4 minutes.

> When the endpoint service is created, take a note of your endpoint service name from the command in the lower area of the console page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the endpoint service is created, take a note of your endpoint service name from the command in the lower area of the console.
```

```bash
aws ec2 create-vpc-endpoint --vpc-id <your_vpc_id> --region <your_region> --service-name <your_endpoint_service_name> --vpc-endpoint-type Interface --subnet-ids <your_application_subnet_ids>
```

> Then create an AWS interface endpoint either in the AWS Management Console or using the AWS CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then create an AWS interface endpoint either using the AWS Management Console or using the AWS CLI.
```

<SimpleTab>
<div label="Use AWS Console">

> To use the AWS Management Console to create the VPC interface endpoint, perform the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the AWS Management Console to create a VPC interface endpoint, perform the following steps:
```

1. Go to **VPC** > **Endpoints**.
2. Click **Create Endpoint**.

    The **Create endpoint** page is displayed.

    <img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/create-endpoint-2.png" width="70%" auto="Verify endpoint service" />

3. Select **Other endpoint services**.
4. Enter the endpoint service name.
5. Click **Verify service**.
6. Select your VPC in the drop-down list.
7. Select the availability zones where your TiDB cluster is located in the **Subnets** area.

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > If your service is spanning across more than three availability zones (AZs), you might not be able to select AZs in the **Subnets** area. This issue occurs when there is an extra AZ in your selected region in addition to the AZs where your TiDB cluster is located. In this case, contact [PingCAP Technical Support](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/tidb-cloud-support).

8. Select your security group properly in the **Security groups** area.
9. Click **Create endpoint**.

</div>
<div label="Use AWS CLI">

To use the AWS CLI to create a VPC interface endpoint, perform the following steps:

> 1. Fill in the **VPC ID** and **Subnet IDs** fields. You can get the IDs from your AWS Management Console.

Reviewer: which page are the **VPC ID** and **Subnet IDs** fields located?

Author: ```suggestion
1. Fill in the **VPC ID** and **Subnet IDs** fields on the private endpoint creation page. You can get the IDs from your AWS Management Console.
```

2. Copy the command in the lower area of the page and run it in your terminal. Then click **Next**.

> **Tip:**
>
> - Before running the command, you need to have AWS CLI installed and configured. See [AWS CLI configuration basics](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-quickstart.html) for details.
>
> - If your service is spanning across more than three availability zones (AZs), you will get an error message indicating that the VPC endpoint service does not support the AZ of the subnet. This issue occurs when there is an extra AZ in your selected region in addition to the AZs where your TiDB cluster is located. In this case, you can contact [PingCAP Technical Support](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/tidb-cloud-support).
>

> > - You cannot copy the command until TiDB Cloud finishes creating endpoint service in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - You cannot copy the command until TiDB Cloud finishes creating an endpoint service in the background.
```

</div>
</SimpleTab>

### Step 4. Accept the endpoint connection

> 1. Go back to the **TiDB Cloud console**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go back to the TiDB Cloud console.
```

> 2. Fill in the box with your VPC endpoint ID in the **Create Private Endpoint** page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Fill in the box with your VPC endpoint ID on the **Create Private Endpoint** page.
```

3. Click **Next**.

### Step 5. Enable private DNS

Enable private DNS in AWS. You can either use the AWS Management Console or the AWS CLI.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="Use AWS Console">

To enable private DNS in your AWS Management Console:

1. Go to **VPC** > **Endpoints**.
2. Right-click your endpoint ID and select **Modify private DNS name**.

> 3. Check the **Enable for this endpoint** box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Select the **Enable for this endpoint** check box.
```

4. Click **Save changes**.

<img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/enable-private-dns.png" width="70%"  auto="Enable private DNS" />

</div>
<div label="Use AWS CLI">

To enable private DNS using your AWS CLI, copy the command and run it in your AWS CLI.

```bash
aws ec2 modify-vpc-endpoint --vpc-endpoint-id <your_vpc_endpoint_id> --private-dns-enabled
```

</div>
</SimpleTab>

Click **Create** in the TiDB Cloud console to finalize the creation of the private endpoint.

Then you can connect to the endpoint service. See [Connect to TiDB cluster via private endpoint](/tidb-cloud/connect-to-tidb-cluster.md#connect-via-private-endpoint) for details.

## Private endpoint status reference

> When you use [private endpoint connections](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections.md), the statuses of private endpoints or private endpoint services are displayed on the [**Private Endpoint** page](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections.md#prerequisites).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use private endpoint connections, the statuses of private endpoints or private endpoint services are displayed on the [**Private Endpoint** page](#prerequisites).
```

Take the following steps to set up a private endpoint. If you have multiple clusters, you need to repeat these steps for each cluster that you want to connect to using AWS PrivateLink.

In addition to the [prerequisites](#prerequisites), there are 5 steps to set up a private endpoint connection with AWS PrivateLink:

1. [Choose a TiDB cluster](#step-1-choose-a-tidb-cluster)

> 2. [Check the service endpoint region](#step-2-choose-the-service-endpoint-region)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. [Check the service endpoint region](#step-2-check-the-service-endpoint-region)
```

Author: done

9. Click **Create endpoint**.

</div>
<div label="Use AWS CLI">

To use the AWS CLI to create a VPC interface endpoint, perform the following steps:

1. Fill in the **VPC ID** and **Subnet IDs** fields. You can get the IDs from your AWS Management Console.
2. Copy the command in the lower area of the page and run it in your terminal. Then click **Next**.

> **Tip:**
>
> - Before running the command, you need to have AWS CLI installed and configured. See [AWS CLI configuration basics](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-quickstart.html) for details.
>
> - If your service is spanning across more than three availability zones (AZs), you will get an error message indicating that the VPC endpoint service does not support the AZ of the subnet. This issue occurs when there is an extra AZ in your selected region in addition to the AZs where your TiDB cluster is located. In this case, you can contact [PingCAP Technical Support](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/tidb-cloud-support).
>
> - You cannot copy the command until TiDB Cloud finishes creating endpoint service in the background.

</div>
</SimpleTab>

### Step 4. Accept the endpoint connection

> 1. Go back to the TiDB Cloud console.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Go back to the **TiDB Cloud console**.
```

Take the following steps to set up a private endpoint. If you have multiple clusters, you need to repeat these steps for each cluster that you want to connect to using AWS PrivateLink.

There are 6 steps to set up a private endpoint connection with AWS PrivateLink:

1. [Do the prerequisites](#prerequisites).
2. [Choose a TiDB cluster](#step-1-choose-a-tidb-cluster)
3. [Choose the service endpoint region](#step-2-choose-the-service-endpoint-region)
4. [Create an AWS interface endpoint](#step-3-create-an-aws-interface-endpoint)
5. [Accept the endpoint connection](#step-4-accept-the-endpoint-connection)
6. [Enable private DNS](#step-5-enable-private-dns)

> 

Reviewer 2: 建议和流程上的步骤 1 ~ 5 匹配上，避免用户转换步骤编号

Author: done

In addition to the [prerequisites](#prerequisites), there are 5 steps to set up a private endpoint connection with AWS PrivateLink:

1. [Choose a TiDB cluster](#step-1-choose-a-tidb-cluster)
2. [Choose the service endpoint region](#step-2-choose-the-service-endpoint-region)
3. [Create an AWS interface endpoint](#step-3-create-an-aws-interface-endpoint)
4. [Accept the endpoint connection](#step-4-accept-the-endpoint-connection)
5. [Enable private DNS](#step-5-enable-private-dns)

### Prerequisites

TiDB Cloud supports private endpoints only for Dedicated Tier clusters. You are expected to create a Dedicated Tier cluster before creating a private endpoint. For detailed instructions, see [Create a TiDB Cluster in TiDB Cloud](/tidb-cloud/create-tidb-cluster.md).

To start setting up a private endpoint, open the private endpoint creation page:

1. In the TiDB Cloud console, click the **Project Settings** tab.
2. Click **Private Endpoint** on the left menu.
3. Click **Add** on the **Private Endpoint** page.

### Step 1. Choose a TiDB cluster

> 1. Click the drop-down list to choose a TiDB cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Click the drop-down list and choose an available TiDB cluster.
```

2. Click **Next**.

> **Note:**
>

> > Before a cluster is created, it is not displayed in the drop-down list.

Reviewer 2: Note 对应的场景已经变更，可以清理掉 Note 部分

1. Fill in the **VPC ID** and **Subnet IDs** fields. You can get the IDs from your AWS Management Console.

2. After the endpoint service is created, take a note of your endpoint service name from the command.

    ![Endpoint service name](/media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/private-endpoint-service-name.png)

3. Create a VPC interface endpoint in AWS.

    You can either use the AWS Management Console or the AWS CLI.

    <SimpleTab>
    <div label="Use AWS Console">

    To use the AWS Management Console to create the VPC interface endpoint, perform the following steps:

    1. Go to **VPC** > **Endpoints**.
    2. Click **Create Endpoint**.

        The **Create endpoint** page is displayed.

        <img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/create-endpoint-1.png" width="70%" auto="Create endpoint" />

    3. Select **Other endpoint services**.
    4. Enter the endpoint service name you have obtained from the **Interface endpoint** page of the TiDB Cloud console.
    5. Click **Verify service**.

        <img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/create-endpoint-2.png" width="70%" auto="Verify endpoint service" />

    6. Select your VPC in the drop-down list.

>     7. In the **Security groups** area, select up your security group properly.

Reviewer 4: set or select (but not select up)? Please confirm. Because I see both words are used in the troubleshooting section.
```suggestion
    7. In the **Security groups** area, select your security group properly.
```

Reviewer 3: +1, put the key verb first.

Author: @benmaoer @zhuangliangji1992 OK, I'll put the verb first, but from the console, maybe "select" is better? You have also suggested using "select" in the Lark group.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/41534398/188107228-b401e487-4e89-4783-bbcd-33fbacae06cc.png)

    </div>
    </SimpleTab>

### Step 4. Accept the endpoint connection

Go back to the TiDB Cloud console, in the **Create Private Endpoint** page, fill in the box with your VPC endpoint ID and click **Next**.

### Step 5. Enable private DNS

Enable private DNS in AWS. You can either use the AWS Management Console or the AWS CLI.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="Use AWS Console">

To enable private DNS in your AWS Management Console:

1. Go to **VPC** > **Endpoints**.
2. Right-click your endpoint ID and select **Modify private DNS name**.
3. Check the **Enable for this endpoint** box.
4. Click **Save changes**.

> <img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/enable-private-dns.png" width="70%" />

Author: ```suggestion
<img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/enable-private-dns.png" width="70%"  auto="Enable private DNS" />
```

The possible statuses of a private endpoint are explained as follows:

- **Not Configured**: You have just created an endpoint service but have not yet created a private endpoint. If you click **Edit** of that row, you are directed to the **Interface Endpoint** stage of creating a private endpoint. See [Step 4. Create an endpoint service](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections.md#step-4-create-an-aws-interface-endpoint) for details.

> - **Pending**: After your VPC ID is verified at the **Interface Endpoint** stage of creating a private endpoint, you have not yet enabled the private DNS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Pending**: Waiting for processing.
```
After enabling dns, it will also be pending for a period of time.

Author: addressed

- **Creating**: The endpoint service is being created, which takes 3 to 5 minutes.
- **Active**: The endpoint service is created, no matter whether the private endpoint is created or not.
- **Deleting**: The endpoint service or the cluster is being deleted, which takes 3 to 5 minutes.

## Troubleshooting

> ### I cannot connect to TiDB cluster via private endpoint after enabling private DNS. Why?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### I cannot connect to a TiDB cluster via a private endpoint after enabling private DNS. Why?
```

You might need to properly set the security group for your VPC endpoint in the AWS Management Console. Go to **VPC** > **Endpoints**. Right-click your VPC endpoint and select **Manage security groups**.

<img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/manage-security-groups.png" width="70%" auto="Manage security groups" />

> ### I cannot enable private DNS. An error is reported indicating that the `enableDnsSupport` and `enableDnsHostnames` VPC attributes are not enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### I cannot enable private DNS. An error is reported indicating that the `enableDnsSupport` and `enableDnsHostnames` VPC attributes are not enabled.
```

> Make sure than DNS hostname and DNS resolution are both enabled in your VPC setting. They are disabled by default when you create a VPC in the AWS Management Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that DNS hostname and DNS resolution are both enabled in your VPC setting. They are disabled by default when you create a VPC in the AWS Management Console.
```

The possible statuses of a private endpoint are explained as follows:

- **Not Configured**: You have just created an endpoint service but have not yet created a private endpoint. If you click **Edit** of that row, you are directed to the **Interface Endpoint** stage of creating a private endpoint. See [Step 4. Create an endpoint service](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections.md#step-4-create-an-aws-interface-endpoint) for details.

> - **Pending**: After your VPC ID is verified at the **Interface Endpoint** stage of creating a private endpoint, you have not yet enabled the private DNS. If you click **Edit** of that row, you are directed to the **Enable Private DNS** stage of creating a private endpoint. See [Step 6. Enable Private DNS](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections.md#step-6-enable-private-dns) for details.

Reviewer 3: Can't click `Edit` when pending now.

- **Creating**: The endpoint service is being created, which takes 3 to 5 minutes.
- **Active**: The endpoint service is created, no matter whether the private endpoint is created or not.
- **Deleting**: The endpoint service or the cluster is being deleted, which takes 3 to 5 minutes.

## Troubleshooting

### I cannot connect to TiDB cluster via private endpoint after enabling private DNS. Why?

You might need to properly set the security group for your VPC endpoint in the AWS Management Console. Go to **VPC** > **Endpoints**. Right-click your VPC endpoint and select **Manage security groups**.

> In the **Manage security groups** page, properly select the security group for your VPC endpoint.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a bit redundant and can be deleted.

Author: agree

<img src="../media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/manage-security-groups.png" width="70%" auto="Manage security groups" />

### I cannot enable private DNS. An error is reported indicating that the `enableDnsSupport` and `enableDnsHostnames` VPC attributes are not enabled

> When you create a VPC in AWS Management Console, the DNS hostnames setting is disabled by default. Before enabling private DNS, make sure that DNS hostname and DNS resolution are both enabled in your VPC setting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure DNS hostname and DNS resolution are both enabled in your VPC setting. They are disabled by default when you create a VPC in AWS Management Console.
```
